---
domain: D03
module: M5
title: Nollpekare
layout: module
quiz: Q5
links:
    - title: "Tutorial"
      url: "http://www.cplusplus.com/doc/tutorial/pointers/"
    - title: "Pointer usage"
      url: "http://www.codeproject.com/Articles/11560/Pointers-Usage-in-C-Beginners-to-Advanced#2"
    - title: "Beginner's guide"
      url: "http://www.codeproject.com/Articles/627/A-Beginner-s-Guide-to-Pointers"
---

# Nullpointers

All pointervariables have a special value "nullptr" meaning that this pointer is not pointing att anything.
This is to make it possible to check if a pointer is pointing at something or at nothing.
But if a pointer variable is not initiated it will have an __undefined__ value and if used the program will normally crash.
If you try to dereference a nullptr the program will also crash but the difference is that it is possible to check if the pointer has a nullptr value or not.

Note: You should use "nullptr" to test if a pointer has a "nullptr" value but from historical reasons it is common to see "NULL", "null" or "0" used instead.

One programmingstyle is to allways set a pointer to nullptr in the declaration.


__Kodexempel A__

{% highlight c++ linenos %}
    void CheckPtr(float* ptr){
    if (ptr == nullptr){ // if ptr is a null pointer exit
        return;
    }
 
    // otherwise ptr points to something so we can increas it by two
    *ptr += 2.0f;
}
 
int main(){
    // Set the float pointer to null in the declaration, no possibilty for errors!
    float* ptr = nullptr;
    // You can also write 0 or NULL but use nullptr (C++11-standard).
 
    CheckPtr(ptr); // ptr is sent in with null as value, nothing happens
 
    float f = 5.0f;
    ptr = &f;
    CheckPtr(ptr);  //now ptr points to f and f will be increased by 2.0f
}
{% endhighlight %}

### Övningsuppgift 1
Vad skrivs ut till konsolfönstret av följande kod?
{% highlight c++ linenos %}
int* ptr = nullptr;
cout << ptr;
{% endhighlight %}

#### Svar:
Probably the result was something like "0x000000" since nullptr normally has value 0
{: .spoiler}

### Övningsuppgift 2
Vad skrivs ut till konsolfönstret av följande kod?
{% highlight c++ linenos %}
int* another_ptr;
cout << *another_ptr;
{% endhighlight %}


####Svar:
Probably the program chrashed since the pointer was not initiated!
{: .spoiler}

### Kommentar

a pointer value can be treated as a boolean, it will then evaluate to false if it is the null pointer and true otherwise.

{% highlight c++ linenos %}
// Instead of:
if (ptr == nullptr)
// you can write:
if (!ptr)

// Insted of:
if (ptr != nullptr)
// you can write:
if (ptr)
{% endhighlight %}


